Roles: first draft (#10)
scverse/governance: in_progress/roles.md

# Abstract

The purpose of this document is to formalize the governance process used by the `scverse` project, to clarify how decisions are made and how the various elements of our community interact.

As a whole, we are a consensus-based community project.
However, any subproject within the scverse can have their own governance system as long as they do not conflict with the rules set out here.
Anyone with an interest in the project can join the community, contribute to the project design, and participate in the decision making process.
This document describes how that participation takes place, how to find consensus, and how deadlocks are resolved.

# Roles And Responsibilities

## The Community

The scverse community consists of anyone using or working with the project in any way.

> ## Contributors/ Project developers

Reviewer: I'm confused by the language in this section. 

- Any new contributor to scvi-tools would need to be approved by two core devs from separate employers? 
- What rights does a contributor have?

Author: We did touch on this at a meeting right after, but I'll update with my POV here:

> What rights does a contributor have?

Not too much really. This role isn't about rights and responsibilities, but recognition for people who contribute – who don't quite rise to "core". We would add them to a team on the `scverse` governance repo. We could definiltey consider more, but it's a badge next to their name.

> Any new contributor to scvi-tools would need to be approved by two core devs from separate employers?

For contributing code and getting commit rights, no. But we could keep seperate out project developers and contributors.

A community member can become a contributor by interacting directly with the project in concrete ways, such as:

- proposing, discussing, or reviewing a change to the code, documentation, or specification via a GitHub pull request to any https://github.com/scverse repository;
- reporting a GitHub issue to any https://github.com/scverse repository;
- discussing examples or usage issues on any of our discussion platforms

among other possibilities.
Any community member can become a contributor, and all are encouraged to do so.
By contributing to the project, community members can directly help to shape its future.

All community members are required to adhere by our code of conduct (**TODO: add link**).
Potential contributors are encouraged to read the Contributing Guide (**TODO: add link**).

A community member becomes a contributor when the following criteria are met:

> - At least two core developers from separate employers agree membership is a good idea.

Reviewer 2: Should we state here how to apply for a developer position? Ideally I would almost hope that we could automate this in some way in the future...

Author: "core developer" or "contributor"?

Contributor, probably private chat channel, voting w/  :+1: :-1:? Bots seem easy enough, but it would have to know about employers for this.

Reviewer 2: Think that the "separate employers" is over complicating things. It's not like this is a super serious role. I'd suggest not to overengineer this.

Author: I think this could take a little more thought, but not super important to happen right now. Some thoughts:

* I think a little friction is good for allowing anyone to raise an objection (e.g. history the rest of the team may not know about – probably also the only case where someone would get rejected?)
* I like the multiple employers thing is good for preventing a whole lab being added in a day of work that "is going to happen"
* I would also like to consider a simple onboarding for contributors, basically welcomes and introductions. Make new people feel welcome.

Reviewer 2: > I think a little friction is good for allowing anyone to raise an objection (e.g. history the rest of the team may not know about – probably also the only case where someone would get rejected?)

Sure, agreed. I think that the likelihood of this happening is incredibly small based on my experience with the other communities.

> I like the multiple employers thing is good for preventing a whole lab being added in a day of work that "is going to happen"

Sure, I got that. But why not? If we want to bring in and encourage as many people as possible this process should be as easy and fast as possible. In nf-core you get commit rights by writing your Github username into a Slack channel. Everyone gets invited. We don't have to follow this model, but I would suggest to make things as easy and fast as possible. Everything else is overhead that discourages people to contribute and results in more work for us.

> I would also like to consider a simple onboarding for contributors, basically welcomes and introductions. Make new people feel welcome.

Yeah. Think that this depends on our chat solution, but a section on the website would also be nice. :+1:

- The new member has supported the project several times, either through code or otherwise

> ## Core team

Reviewer 2: To simplify the roles I would merge the core team and core developers.
They are making contributions in different ways (e.g. outreach vs project maintenance), but both are significant. No need to distinguish them in my opinion.

Author: > No need to distinguish them in my opinion.

I think we do need to distinguish for things like responsibilities. E.g. outreach members probably don't need to know a ton about the review process, or to have commit rights to all projects. Also probably don't need to go to technical meetings. I think this keeps the roles themselves simple.

I would agree that for many purposes we otherwise don't need to distinguish.

Reviewer 2: True, but it is also not like it would hurt if they had commit rights. Remember, in nf-core **every** member has commit access to **all** repositories (very few exceptions) and people are surprisingly reluctant to merge things that they should not be doing. This happens like almost never. An outreach member of scverse would know how to behave and this would never happen, I am sure. We are talking about like 5 people or something here.

I don't mind having two roles, but the more complex we make this structure, the more work we will always have. Twice the listings of people, twice the role descriptions, [...]

Author: We could give everyone on the core team commit rights, though I also remember nf-core saying they were re-thinking the commit rights thing. I still think documenting specific roles would still be valuable.

A very common piece of advice on project management I've been getting is to have clear documented roles. I think this becomes very important for "who's job is it to moderate forums", "who responds to conduct complaints", "who could merge a critical bug fix to this repo". One of the key features noted here was it makes it explicit what roles are currently empty and who you need to recruit/ hire.

Another is letting people know what they're signing up for. If we say "core members are responsible for the twitter account, managing the community, and reviewing PRs", that's a lot of different things!

Reviewer 2: > We could give everyone on the core team commit rights, though I also remember nf-core saying they were re-thinking the commit rights thing. I still think documenting specific roles would still be valuable.
> 
> A very common piece of advice on project management I've been getting is to have clear documented roles. I think this becomes very important for "who's job is it to moderate forums", "who responds to conduct complaints", "who could merge a critical bug fix to this repo". One of the key features noted here was it makes it explicit what roles are currently empty and who you need to recruit/ hire.
> 
> Another is letting people know what they're signing up for. If we say "core members are responsible for the twitter account, managing the community, and reviewing PRs", that's a lot of different things!

I can totally understand your position. Think we should discuss this tomorrow :)

The core team are community members that have demonstrated continued commitment to the project through ongoing contributions.
They have shown they can be trusted to maintain the scverse with care.
Team members appear as organization members on the scverse [GitHub organization](https://github.com/orgs/scverse/people) and are on our [@scverse/core](https://github.com/orgs/scverse/teams/core) GitHub team (**TODO**).

There are sub-roles within the core team depending on the kinds covering different kinds of contributions and responsibilities.

### Core developers

Core developers are members of the core team who have made signifigant code contributions to the `scverse`.
Becoming a core developer allows contributors to merge approved pull requests, cast votes for and against merging a pull-request, and be involved in deciding major changes to the API, and thereby more easily carry on with their project related activities. 
Core developers are on our [@scverse/core-devs](https://github.com/orgs/scverse/teams/core-devs) GitHub team (**TODO**).

> Core developers are expected to review code contributions while adhering to the [core developer guide](CORE_DEV_GUIDE.md) (**TODO**).

Author: I think you'd have areas of expertise which we might want input on. Or a particular feature you'd like to get merged.

One case here, once Daniella is back from vacation, scvi-tools core devs can get the scIB tools metrics merged faster by helping with the review. At least, that's what I'd be willing to do with scanpy – I'd be open to some level of per-project rules on "who can merge".

> Core developers are expected to review code contributions while adhering to the [core developer guide](CORE_DEV_GUIDE.md) (**TODO**).

Reviewer: If there's a particular feature I want merged in scanpy and then I go solo and write and commit it that seems bad. This language makes it seem I can approve my own PR in e.g., Squidpy.

> Core developers are expected to review code contributions while adhering to the [core developer guide](CORE_DEV_GUIDE.md) (**TODO**).

Author: > If there's a particular feature I want merged in scanpy and then I go solo and write and commit it that seems bad

I think I would agree this would be bad. The idea is more that since you are one of the trusted core devs we assume you wouldn't abuse this ability.

It lets us say "hey can you review this, and merge when it's done", or lets you fix a critical bug while someone else is on vacation.

> All core packages must have at least one core developer as a maintainer.

Reviewer: what happens when the one core developer moves on from their position? the new individual needs to be approved? I feel like the handling of the one core developer from the project should be handled only by that project.

Author: > what happens when the one core developer moves on from their position?

Good point. It would be ideal if we could keep continuity here.

Maybe "each package should always have a core developer as a maintainer"? I'd assume if someone is off boarding they could nominate. I do worry that this is not how these things tend to go though. E.g. there's often the idea "I'll have enough time to maintain this".

> I feel like the handling of the one core developer from the project should be handled only by that project.

All other times a voting member is added it's done by consent of the other voting members. Wouldn't it be strange to have one case where the decision is made unilaterally by an individual?

New core developers can be nominated by any existing core developer. 
While there is no hard-and-fast rule about who can be nominated, ideally, they should have: 

* Been part of the community for at least two months
* Contributed significant changes of their own
* Contributed to the discussion and review of others' work
* Collaborated in a way befitting our community values

After nomination voting will happen on a private mailing list by the core team.

> While it is expected that most votes will be unanimous, a two-thirds majority of the cast votes is enough.

Reviewer: is it expected? seems like unnecessary language

Reviewer 3: which part? anonimity or 2/3 ? I don't have strong opinion about (un-)anonimity but 2/3 maybe good to keep in for clarity?

Reviewer: I'm just saying to remove the language "While it is expected..." it seems unnecessary

Primary maintainers of new core packages, who are not already core developers, will be invited to join.

## Steering Council

The Steering Council (SC) members are core developers who have additional responsibilities to ensure the smooth running of the project.

> SC members are expected to participate in strategic planning, approve changes to the governance model, and make decisions about funding granted to the project itself.

Reviewer: this language implies the PIs are on the steering council

Reviewer: to clarify, we should clarify this is regarding funding granted to the org versus to a project (potentially through a lab)

Reviewer: yes

The scverse community consists of anyone using or working with the project in any way.

## Contributors

A community member can become a contributor by interacting directly with the project in concrete ways, such as:

- proposing, discussing, or reviewing a change to the code, documentation, or specification via a GitHub pull request to any https://github.com/scverse repository;
- reporting a GitHub issue to any https://github.com/scverse repository;
- discussing examples or usage issues on any of our discussion platforms

among other possibilities.
Any community member can become a contributor, and all are encouraged to do so.
By contributing to the project, community members can directly help to shape its future.

All community members are required to adhere by our code of conduct (**TODO: add link**).
Potential contributors are encouraged to read the Contributing Guide (**TODO: add link**).

A community member becomes a contributor when the following criteria are met:

- At least two core developers from separate employers agree membership is a good idea.
- The new member has supported the project several times, either through code or otherwise

### Project developers

> Individual projects within the scverse have a lot of freedom in deciding how their projects are developed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Individual projects within scverse have a lot of freedom in deciding how their projects are developed.
```

This includes who gets commit rights to their projects.

## Core team

The core team are community members that have demonstrated continued commitment to the project through ongoing contributions.

> They have shown they can be trusted to maintain the scverse with care.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
They have shown they can be trusted to maintain scverse with care.
```

Team members appear as organization members on the scverse [GitHub organization](https://github.com/orgs/scverse/people) and are on our [@scverse/core](https://github.com/orgs/scverse/teams/core) GitHub team (**TODO**).

There are sub-roles within the core team depending on the kinds covering different kinds of contributions and responsibilities.

### Core developers

> Core developers are members of the core team who have made signifigant code contributions to the `scverse`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Core developers are members of the core team who have made signifigant code contributions to `scverse`.
```

> Becoming a core developer allows contributors to merge approved pull requests, cast votes for and against merging a pull-request, and be involved in deciding major changes to the API, and thereby more easily carry on with their project related activities. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Becoming a core developer allows for merging approved pull requests, casting votes for and against merging a pull-request, and being involved in deciding major changes to the API. This enables core developers to more easily carry on with their subproject related activities. 
```

Author: > Core developers are members of the core team who have made signifigant code contributions to `scverse`.
> They are granted additional rights so they can more easily carry on with their `scverse` related activities.
> These rights include: merging approved pull requests, voting for and against contested pull-requests, and being involved in deciding major changes to the API.

# Abstract

The purpose of this document is to formalize the governance process used by the `scverse` project, to clarify how decisions are made and how the various elements of our community interact.

As a whole, we are a consensus-based community project.
However, any subproject within the scverse can have their own governance system as long as they do not conflict with the rules set out here.
Anyone with an interest in the project can join the community, contribute to the project design, and participate in the decision making process.
This document describes how that participation takes place, how to find consensus, and how deadlocks are resolved.

# Roles And Responsibilities

## The Community

> The scverse community consists of anyone using or working with the project in any way.

Author: > Does being part of the community entail being part of the GH organization?

From the meeting today:

We want something to signify contributors to the ecosystem. This might be as org member, otherwise we need a different way to track this.

Let's come up with what the "contributor"/ "developer" role is, then come back to this?

I think members of the organization will be in the "contributor" role, but we will follow

> The scverse community consists of anyone using or working with the project in any way.

Reviewer 3: agree with contributor v. developer role.

## Contributors

A community member can become a contributor by interacting directly with the project in concrete ways, such as:

- proposing, discussing, or reviewing a change to the code, documentation, or specification via a GitHub pull request to any https://github.com/scverse repository;
- reporting a GitHub issue to any https://github.com/scverse repository;
- discussing examples or usage issues on any of our discussion platforms

among other possibilities.
Any community member can become a contributor, and all are encouraged to do so.
By contributing to the project, community members can directly help to shape its future.

> Potential contributors are encouraged to read the Contributing Guide (**TODO**) as well as the Code of Conduct (**TODO**)

Author: How about

```suggestion
All community members are required to adhere by our code of conduct (**TODO: add link**).
Potential contributors are encouraged to read the Contributing Guide (**TODO: add link**).
```

A community member becomes a contributor when the following criteria are met:

- At least two core developers from separate employers agree membership is a good idea.
- The new member has supported the project several times, either through code or otherwise, and has demonstrated a willingness to help solve other people's problems, not just their own.

> - The new member demonstrates some degree of familiarity of open source practices and online courtesy.

Author: It then becomes a bit redundant though, right? It's definitely a requirement, but I don't think we need need to say "must adhere to code of conduct" all over the place.

I'm trying to figure out what the point of this bullet is. I guess it's meant to be targeting largely in-person community members? Event organizers and the like?

> - The new member demonstrates some degree of familiarity of open source practices and online courtesy.

Reviewer 2: Yes, let's delete it.

## Core developers

> Core developers are community members that have demonstrated continued commitment to the project through ongoing contributions.

Author: In practice probably. Two cases where this might not make sense:

* Collaboratorive projects that just need an organization to live in. For example, if we are collaborating on something with bioconductor, does that person want the responsibilities of being a "core" member here.
* If we're taking over a project that's otherwise abandoned. On the other hand, why would we do this.

How about: "all primary developers of core projects are invited to be core developers"? Could also leave it vague until we've gone through this a bit.

> Core developers are community members that have demonstrated continued commitment to the project through ongoing contributions.

Reviewer 2: Fine with that.

"If we're taking over a project that's otherwise abandoned. On the other hand, why would we do this."
Yeah, of course. No point in including inactive people.

> Core developers are community members that have demonstrated continued commitment to the project through ongoing contributions.

Author: Hmm, thinking through this more and trying to fit it in with:

> New core developers can be nominated by any existing core developer, and for details on that process see our core developer guide.

How about:

> All core packages must have at least one core developer as a maintainer.
> Primary maintainers of new core packages will be invited to join as a core member.

I think there are benefits to requiring a "core maintainer" be listed on a package. That way we won't end up with the `pydata/patsy` situation where a our name is on it, but no one is actually in charge of maintaining it.

The purpose of the SC is to ensure smooth progress from the big-picture perspective.
Changes that impact the full project require analysis informed by long experience with both the project and the larger ecosystem.
When the core developer community (including the SC members) fails to reach such a consensus in a reasonable timeframe, the SC is the entity that resolves the issue.

Members of the steering council also have the "owner" (**TBD**) role within the [zarr-developers GitHub organization](https://github.com/zarr-developers/)
and are ultimately responsible for managing the [scverse](https://github.com/scverse) GitHub account, the [@zarr_dev](https://twitter.com/zarr_dev)
twitter account, the [scverse website](https://scverse.org), and other similar scverse-owned resources.

The steering council is currently fixed in size to three members.
This number will be increased as our community grows and diversifies, but will always be an odd number to ensure a simple majority vote outcome is always possible. 
The initial steering council of the `scverse` consists of

* [Isaac Virshup](https://github.com/ivirshup)
* [Danila Bredikhin](https://github.com/gtca)

> * [Lukas Huemos](https://github.com/Zethson)

Author: oops

# Roles And Responsibilities

## The Community

The scverse community consists of anyone using or working with the project in any way.

## Contributors/ Project developers

A community member can become a contributor by interacting directly with the project in concrete ways, such as:

- proposing, discussing, or reviewing a change to the code, documentation, or specification via a GitHub pull request to any https://github.com/scverse repository;
- reporting a GitHub issue to any https://github.com/scverse repository;
- discussing examples or usage issues on any of our discussion platforms

among other possibilities.
Any community member can become a contributor, and all are encouraged to do so.
By contributing to the project, community members can directly help to shape its future.

All community members are required to adhere by our code of conduct (**TODO: add link**).
Potential contributors are encouraged to read the Contributing Guide (**TODO: add link**).

A community member becomes a contributor when the following criteria are met:

- At least two core developers from separate employers agree membership is a good idea.

> - The new member has supported the project several times, either through code or otherwise, and has demonstrated a willingness to help solve other people's problems, not just their own.

Reviewer 3: I agree with the point but maybe the wording not optimal? I would remove "not just their own" and add "and activily engaging in community projects." Basicalluy people that are active on github but don't necessarily write code.

Reviewer 3: more generally, for me contributors are people that are not listed on website, but that have the badge on github (and potentially the linkedin badge as well) and are active contributors of discussion in various forms other than actually writing code

Author: ```suggestion
- The new member has supported the project several times, either through code or otherwise
```

I would be fine with this even. I feel like supporting the project goes with solving problems.

E.g. asking many questions isn't really supporting, but pointing other users to the right solutions is

Reviewer 3: > E.g. asking many questions isn't really supporting, but pointing other users to the right solutions is

true, agree

## Core developers

Core developers are community members that have demonstrated continued commitment to the project through ongoing contributions.
They have shown they can be trusted to maintain the scverse with care.
Becoming a core developer allows contributors to merge approved pull requests, cast votes for and against merging a pull-request, and be involved in deciding major changes to the API, and thereby more easily carry on with their project related activities. 
Core developers appear as organization members on the scverse [GitHub organization](https://github.com/orgs/scverse/people) and are on our [@scverse/core-devs](https://github.com/orgs/scverse/teams/core-devs) GitHub team (**TODO**).
Core developers are expected to review code contributions while adhering to the [core developer guide](CORE_DEV_GUIDE.md) (**TODO**).
New core developers can be nominated by any existing core developer, and for details on that process see our core developer guide.
All core packages must have at least one core developer as a maintainer.

> Primary maintainers of new core packages, who are not already core developers, will be invited to join.

Reviewer 3: agree with all these points.

## Steering Council

The Steering Council (SC) members are core developers who have additional responsibilities to ensure the smooth running of the project.
SC members are expected to participate in strategic planning, approve changes to the governance model, and make decisions about funding granted to the project itself.

> (Funding to community members is theirs to pursue and manage). 

Reviewer 3: this not sure, I think core devs can also apply and manage to funding, but prbably legally this would ahve to happen via a SC

The initial steering council of the `scverse` consists of

* [Isaac Virshup](https://github.com/ivirshup)
* [Danila Bredikhin](https://github.com/gtca)
* [Lukas Heumos](https://github.com/Zethson)

The SC membership is revisited every January.
SC members who do not actively engage with the SC duties are expected to resign.
New members are added by nomination by a core developer.
Nominees should have demonstrated long-term, continued commitment to the project and its mission and values.
A nomination will result in discussion that cannot take more than a month and then admission to the SC by consensus.
During that time deadlocked votes of the SC will be postponed until the new member has joined and another vote can be held.

The `scverse` steering council may be contacted at `steering-council@scverse.org`, or via the [@scverse/steering-council](https://github.com/orgs/scverse/teams/steering-council) GitHub team.

# Decision Making Process

Decisions about the future of the project are made through discussion with all members of the community.
All non-sensitive project management discussion takes place on the issue trackers of the https://github.com/scverse repositories.

> Occasionally, sensitive discussion may occur via a private message.

Reviewer 3: I trust that what's listed here is also what is done in other OSS orgs

Author: This document is based of the one used by `zarr`, `napari`, `skimage`, and `sklearn`
